The cool thing about bitcoin and the mining process is that it's not hidden from us.
The codebase is public,
and we can look at it for ourselves.
This helps us better understand the process behind how certain things
happen and how we might be able to improve the mining process by improving the code.
In this video, we'll explore a few variables that help support bitcoin mining.
We'll look at the code that makes the genesis block,
the original timestamp on that block and a few other variables.
It can be a bit overwhelming to jump into an entire repository.
Here, we'll just focus on a few key points and from there,
hopefully, you'll be comfortable enough to explore a few more on your own.
If you'd like to follow along,
there's a link to the bitcoin codebase down below the video.
So, let's get started.
To start, navigate to the source folder,
named here as src.
In this folder, you'll see a number of important files and folders.
One of these is chainparams.cpp.
This is used to set up the consensus rules for all the blocks.
This is exactly what we're interested in.
Click on this file to open it.
One thing to note is that this file has a.cpp extension.
That tells us that this is a C++ source file.
You might not be familiar with C++ but the naming convention is
just like how.js tells us that something's a JavaScript file.
So, let's look at the code.
The first thing we see here on line 17 is a function to create a genesis block.
Notice the variables for that time of creation,
the bits, the nonce,
the version, and some other information.
Being familiar with some of these ideas,
it's pretty cool to me to see how they're actually implemented in the code.
Next, I'll hit down the line 94.
Here's where the different deployments of bitcoin improvement protocols are set up.
For example, there was an update to the codebase known as CSV.
You can see here that the changes were implemented
at this time and that it'll stop at this time.
Just a bit above this line,
we can also see some variables used in consensus.
Let's look at a few of them now.
Here's one on line 77, nSubsidyHalvingInterval.
This is what designates the halving interval.
You might not be familiar with the halving interval,
but hopefully you remember that miners are rewarded with bitcoin.
Halving is the idea that after a certain amount of blocks are mined,
the reward for all miners is cut in half.
It's sad, but true.
It's one reason why mining is not as profitable as it used to be.
This line shows us that the halving interval is 210,000.
This means that the amount miners are rewarded for successfully mining
a block is halved after every 210,000 blocks.
Here's a chart to show a little about how the having has happened over time.
Until block 210,000, miners earned 50 bitcoin for each block they mined.
From then until block 420,000,
they earned half of that, 25 bitcoin.
This trend continued and will continue for every 210,000 blocks.
The fee they earn is on top of the transaction fees that they collect.
These bitcoin are actually brand new coins
that are added to the collection of all bitcoins.
It's the only way new bitcoin are created,
and this process helps control the supply of bitcoins available.
All right, so let's get back into the code.
There's two more consensus constants that I wanted to call out.
They are in line 84 and 85, nPowTargetTimespan and nPowTargetSpacing.
First, nPowTargetTimespan sets how
often the proof-of-work puzzle adjusts its difficulty level.
Here, it's set to every two weeks.
nPowTargetSpacing determines when the network should expect a new block.
Here it's set to every 10 minutes.
This 10 minutes times 60 is just to convert the time to seconds.
So, that wraps up some of the lines we wanted to look at in the bitcoin codebase.
To recap, we looked at the genesis block, its original timestamp,
and a few consensus variables,
like those related to halving as well as the proof-of-work timespan and spacing.
You can hopefully explore a few more lines on your own.
It can maybe discover how certain things you're
interested in have been implemented and the bitcoin blockchain.
A lot of these same ideas have been used on
other blockchains and it's important to see how they've gone about doing this.
Coming up, you'll have a look at another codebase to
see how some of these ideas have been implemented there.